# #15 Asynchronous JavaScript & EVENT LOOP from scratch 🔥 | Namaste JavaScript Ep.15

## #15.1 How JS Engine Executes the Code Using Call Stack

Remember as in Episode #1  

> JavaScript is a  
> Synchronous  
> Single Threaded  
> language.  

Synchronous means line by line in an order (top to bottom).
Single Threaded means JavaScript can execute only one command at a time.

Synchronous Single Threaded means JavaScript can execute only one command at a time and
in a specific order (means it can go to the next line once the current line finishes its execution).

In short, JavaScript executes code from top to bottom line by line using just a single thread.

JavaScript has only one Call Stack and it can do only one thing at a time.
This Call Stack is present inside the JavaScript Engine.

Study the following example and think about how it will be executed using Call Stack.

Execute and debug this code in the Chrome browser, observe "Call Stack", "Scope" etc. sections under the "Sources" tab in the browser console.

**Examples**

```javascript
// Assume a part of food ordering application.

function prepareOrder(...orderItems) {
    // Prepares order from order items and returns it.
    return {
        id: 9001,
        orderItems: orderItems,
        dateTime: Date.now()
    };
}

const orderItems = [
    'Sandwich',
    'Burger',
    'French Fries',
    'Chocolate Ice-cream',
    'Coke'
];

const order = prepareOrder(...orderItems);

function processOrder(order) {
    const billingAmount = generateBill(order);

    try {
        collectPayment(billingAmount);
    } catch (Exception ex) {
        // Handle payment failure.
    }

    displayOrderSuccessful();

    initiateOrderDelivery();

    // some more code...
}

function generateBill(order) {
    // Code to generate bill
}

function collectPayment(billingAmount) {
    // Code to collect payment
}

function displayOrderSuccessful() {
    // Code to display order successful message
}

function initiateOrderDelivery() {
    // Code to initiate order delivery
}

processOrder(order);
```

## #15.2 Main Job of the Call Stack

Call Stack executes everything that is inside it one by one from top to bottom.  
It does not wait for anything.

## #15.3 How Does JavaScript Perform async Tasks

What if we need to run a script/program after some time?  
How we can do that in JavaScript?

But this is not possible by Call Stack alone, because it does not wait for anything.  
Whatever comes inside Call Stack, it executes it from top to bottom without waiting for anything.

## #15.4 Behind the Scenes in Browser

  Browser
  |
  |---- JavaScript Engine
  |     |
  |     |---- Call Stack
  |
  |
  |---- Local Storage
  |
  |
  |---- Timer
  |
  |
  |---- Address Bar
  |
  |
  |---- DOM
  |
  |
  |---- Geo Location Access
  |
  |
  |---- Bluetooth Access
  |
  |
  | etc.

@todo  
Prepare a diagram for the above.  

## #15.5 Web APIs in JavaScript

Following are some of the Web APIs, they are not part of the JavaScript but they are part of Browser:  

- setTimeout()
- DOM APIs
- fetch()
- localStorage
- console
- location

From JavaScript Engine we can call/access these Web APIs via the "window" which is "Global" object.

And since "window" which is a Global object available inside Global Execution Context,  
we don't need to access these APIs using "window", we can access them directly.  
`window.setTimeout` is same as `setTimeout`.  
`window.fetch` is same as `fetch`.  
etc.

## #15.5 How setTimeout Works Behind the Scenes in Browsers

**Example #1**  

```javascript
console.log('Start');

setTimeout(function someCallback() {
    console.log('setTimeout Callback executed :)');
}, 5000);

console.log('End');
```

Line by line commentary -

Part #1: Memory Allocation Phase  
There is nothing in the script (no variables, no functions) which requires memory allocation.

Part #2: Code Execution Phase (Synchronous)  

* `console.log('Start');`
  This executes and logs 'Start' to the console.

* `setTimeout`
  This registers the given callback "someCallback" with specified time in milliseconds. This is done via Browser's "setTimeout" API. That is it, then it moves to the next line.

* `console.log('End');`
  This executes and logs 'End' to the console.

All of this is done inside the GEC (Global Execution Context).
Please note that Global Execution Context remains in the Call Stack throughout the entire lifecycle of the script.  
Call Stack is empty now (only GEC remains).

Part #3: Code Execution Phase (Asynchronous)  
In the background, timer for the setTimeout callback "someCallback" is in progress...
Once this timer expires it pushes the registered callback "someCallback" into the Callback Queue.
Now Event Loop comes into the picture, it keeps an eye on the Callback Queue all the time.
Event Loop sees that "someCallback" is there in the Callback Queue.
Event Loop pulls "someCallback" from the Callback Queue and pushes it into the Call Stack.
Finally Call Stack executes "someCallback".

**Example #2**  

```javascript
console.log('Start');

setTimeout(function callbackOne() {
    console.log('setTimeout callbackOne executed :)');
}, 0);
setTimeout(function callbackTwo() {
    console.log('setTimeout callbackTwo executed :)');
}, 0);
setTimeout(function callbackThree() {
    console.log('setTimeout callbackThree executed :)');
}, 0);

// The below loop takes long to complete.
const fiveLakh = 500000;
for (let i = 1; i <= fiveLakh; i++) {
    console.log('i', i);
}

console.log('End');
```

## #15.6 Event Loop & Callback Queue in JavaScript

**Callback Queue**  
It contains a list of callbacks that are ready for execution.

**Event Loop**  
It continuously checks if there is any callback available in the Callback Queue,
if yes then it pulls that callback from the Callback Queue and pushes it into the Call Stack.

## #15.7 How Event Listeners Work in JavaScript

**Example**  

```javascript
console.log('Start');

document.getElementById('btn')
    .addEventListener('click', function someCallback() {
        console.log('btn click Callback executed :)');
    });

console.log('End');
```

## #15.8 More About Event Loop

**Event Loop**  
It continuously monitors Call Stack and [Callback Queue + Microtask Queue].  
When Call Stack is empty and [Callback Queue + Microtask Queue] is not empty,  
it pulls a callback from [Callback Queue + Microtask Queue] and pushes it into Call Stack for execution.

Here Microtask Queue gets priority over Callback Queue, so callbacks from Microtask Queue  
will be executed first and then callbacks from Task/Callback Queue gets chance to execute.

We can think of the psuedo code of the Event Loop something like this -  

```
// Event Loop
while (true) {
    if (isCallStackEmpty() && isAnyCallbackReady())
        // pull the next callback from the Callback Queue
        const callback = callbackQueue.pull();

        // push the callback into the Call Stack
        callStack.push(callback);
    }
}

// isCallStackEmpty()
// It checks if Call Stack is empty or not.

// isAnyCallbackReady()
// It checks if there is any callback ready inside Microtask Queue or Task Queue.
// It will check according to priority Microtask Queue > Task Queue.
```

## #15.9 Why Do We Need Event Loop & Callback Queue?

We can have multiple callbacks in our JavaScript application ready for the execution  
at any point of time. So we need a place to store all of them and execute them in the FIFO order.  
So Callback Queue solves this problem.  
Callback Queue is a FIFO(First In First Out) queue.  

Now we also need to make sure that the callbacks which are ready for the execution  
gets pushed into the Callstack one by one.  
Event Loop solves this problem, as described earlier in #15.8 above -  
when Call Stack is empty and Callback Queue is not empty,  
Event Loop pulls a callback from Callback Queue and pushes it into Call Stack for execution.

## #15.10 How fetch() works?

`fetch()` is a Web API, it is used to make network calls or calling APIs.  
`fetch()` returns a Promise, which might be resolved or rejected.

## #15.11 Microtask Queue in JavaScript

Call Stack  <---->  Event Loop  <---->  [ Microtask Queue, Task/Callback Queue ]

Event Loop  <----  PULL from [ Microtask Queue, Task/Callback Queue ]  
Event Loop PULLS a callback from [ Microtask Queue, Task/Callback Queue ]

Event Loop  ---->  PUSH to Call Stack
Event Loop PUSHES a callback to Call Stack.

Microtask Queue gets priority over Task/Callback Queue.

## #15.12 What are Microtasks in JavaScript?

All callbacks from Promises will go inside Microtask Queue, they are Microtasks.

There is something known as "Mutation Observer".  

Mutation Observer keeps on checking whether there is any mutation in DOM tree or not.  
If there is any mutation then it can execute a callback.

So callbacks from [ Promises + Mutation Observer ] goes inside Microtask Queue.  

All other callbacks goes inside Task/Callback Queue.  

## #15.13 Starvation of Functions in Callback Queue

It might be possible that Microtask Queue gets so many callbacks such that it can cause  
callbacks in the Task/Callback Queue to wait very long to execute.
