# #2 How JavaScript Code is executed? ❤️ & Call Stack | Namaste JavaScript Ep. 2

## 2.1 How the Execution Context is created

Remember - Everything in JavaScript happens inside an "Execution Context".

Execution Context is created first before running any JavaScript code.

Every JavaScript program starts with a "Global Execution Context".  
All other execution contexts are placed on top of it OR  
we can say they live inside it.  

Execution Context is created in 2 phases:  
* Memory Creation
  * JavaScript scans the whole code line by line and allocates memory to all the variables and functions.
  * Variables declared with `var` - initialized with value `undefined`, you can access them before their declaration.
  * Variables declared with `let`/`const` - initialized with value `undefined`, they remain in TDZ (Temporal Dead Zone) - you can't access them before their declaration.
  * Functions store their whole code/body as it is.
* Code Execution
  * JavaScript executes the code line by line from top to bottom.

## 2.2 Function Invocation & Execution

During the execution, when JavaScript encounters a function name along with its  
parameters inside paranthesis, it invokes that function and starts executing it.

Functions are like mini programs, they have a set of instructions to do a particular job.  

Each function in JavaScript has its own "Execution Context".  
So whenever a function executes, its "Execution Context" is created before that.  

As soon as the function finishes its execution, its "Execution Context" is deleted.  

Similarly when all the JavaScript code finishes its execution, "Global Execution Context" is deleted.  

## 2.3 Call Stack in JavaScript

There can be multiple "Execution Contexts" for a JavaScript code,  
there can be multiple levels of nesting as well.  
So how JavaScript manages multiple "Execution Contexts"?  
Through a Stack (its a kind of Data Structure).  
And we call it **Call Stack**.  

The "Global Execution Context" resides at the bottom of this Call Stack.  
Whenever there is a function call, its "Execution Context" is created and then pushed to this Call Stack.  
And as soon as function finishes its execution, its "Execution Context" is popped out from this Call Stack and then destroyed.  
This is how the calling function gets back the control.  

> Call Stack maintains  
> the order of execution  
> of execution contexts.  

Other names of the Call Stack in JavaScript are:  
1. Execution Context Stack  
2. Program Stack  
3. Control Stack  
4. Runtime Stack  
5. Machine Stack  
