# #8 let & const in JS, đź”ĄTemporal Dead Zone | Namaste JavaScript Ep. 8

## 8.1 Hoisting

Are `let` and `const` declarations hoisted?  
Yes, `let` and `const` declarations are hoisted.  
But they are hoisted differently then the `var` declarations.  

Variables declared with `var`, `let` or `const` are assigned memory  
and initialized with `undefined` by default in the "Memory Creation" phase.  

Hoisting simply means memory allocation.  

Hoist = to lift or pull something up, often by using ropes, etc.  

So we can imagine that the JavaScript engine pulls all variable and function declarations
from the code and allocates memory to them.  

## 8.2 Attachement with global object

Variables declared with `var` are attached to the global object (`Window`/`this`).  
They are visible under "Global".  

Variables declared with `let`/`const` are not attached to the global object (`Window`/`this`),  
they are stored in a different memory space then global.  
They are visible under "Script".  

## 8.3 Temporal Dead Zone

What is a Temporal Dead Zone?  
For the time being let and const declarations may be in the **Temporal Dead Zone**.  
The variable declared with either `let` or `const` is said to be in the **Temporal Dead Zone** until its initialized.

## 8.4 Re-declaration

We cannot re-declare variables which are already declared using `let`/`const`.  
Whereas we can re-declare the same variables which are already declared using `var`.  

## 8.5 More about const variables

`const` variables must be initialized when they are declared.

We cannot change the value of `const` variables.

In case when we assign an object to a const variable, it holds reference to that object, we can change the underlying object but we can't assign any other object to it.

| Action | `var` | `let` | `const` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Access before declaration/initialization | Works | Gives error because it is in TDZ | Gives error because it is in TDZ | 
| Re-declaration | Allowed | Not Allowed | Not Allowed |
| Re-assignment | Allowed | Allowed | Not Allowed |

## 8.6 Code Example

```javascript
// We need a super hero to start with.
const superHero = {
    name: 'Spiderman',
    actualName: 'Peter Parker',
    from: 'New York'
};

console.log('Initial super hero', superHero);

// Based on a mission we can change the super hero later on.
superHero.name = 'Black Panther';
superHero.actualName = 'T\' Challa';
superHero.from = 'Wakanda';

console.log('Updated super hero', superHero);
```

This is because `superHero` holds/stores reference to the object not the object itself.
So we can change the underlying object, but we cannot make `superHero` point to a different object.

Following won't work, it will give TypeError.

```javascript
const superHero = {
    name: 'Spiderman',
    actualName: 'Peter Parker',
    from: 'New York'
};

superHero = {
    name: 'Black Panther',
    actualName: 'T\' Challa',
    from: 'Wakanda'
};
```

## 8.7 SyntaxError vs. ReferenceError vs. TypeError

### ReferenceError

**Case 1:**  
When a variable declared with either `let` or `const` is accessed before its declaration or
accessed from the Temporal Dead Zone, we get the following error:

`Uncaught ReferenceError: Cannot access 'a' before initialization`

Example  

```javascript
console.log(a);

let a = 10;
var b = 100;
```

**Case 2:**  
When we access a variable which is not defined at all, we get the following error:

`Uncaught ReferenceError: x is not defined`

Example  

```javascript
console.log(x);

let a = 10;
var b = 100;
```

### SyntaxError

**Case 1:**  
We cannot re-declare variables which are already declared using `let`/`const`.

`Uncaught SyntaxError: Identifier 'a' has already been declared`

Example  

```javascript
let a = 10;
let a = 99;

// Following gives the same result.

// let a = 10;
// var a = 99;

// const a = 10;
// const a = 99;

var b = 100;
```

**Case 2:**  
`const` declarations must be initialized.

`Uncaught SyntaxError: Missing initializer in const declaration`

Example  

```javascript
let a = 10;

var b = 100;
var b = 1000;

const x;
```

### TypeError

We cannot change the value of `const` variables.

`Uncaught TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.`

Example  

```javascript
let a = 10;

var b = 100;
var b = 1000;

const pi = 3.14;

pi = 3.15;
```

## 8.8 `var`, `let`, `const` what to use?

**Thumbrules for using `var`, `let` & `const`**  

1. use `const` by default  
2. only use `let` if rebinding is required OR use `let` if you want to change the value later  
3. don't use `var` in ES6  

Some more,  
1. Use `var` for top-level variables that are shared across many (especially larger) scopes.  
2. Use `let` for localized variables in smaller scopes.  
3. Refactor `let` to `const` only after some code has been written and you are reasonably sure that you have got a case where there should not be variable reassignment.  

Read article - [ES2015 `const` is not about immutability](https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/es6-const)
