# #9 Block Scope & Shadowing in JS 🔥| Namaste JavaScript 🙏 Ep. 9

## 9.1 What is a Block?

Block is defined by two curly braces `{}`.  
The code between these two curly braces is called a Block.  
It can have one or more lines of code.  

Block is also known as a **compound statement**.  
Block is used to combine multiple lines of code into a group.  

## 9.2 What is a Block Scope?

Block scope means what all the variables and functions we can access inside the block.

Example  

```javascript
{
  var a = 10;
  let b = 20;
  const c = 30;
}
```

Put a debugger on the first line and check Scope tab in the browser console.  

Variable `a` is attached to the Global object (`window`/`this`)  
and is inside the Global memory space.  

Variables `b` and `c` are not attached to the Global object (`window`/`this`)  
and they are inside the Block memory space.  

`let`/`const` variables are always block scoped,  
this means they are accessible only inside the block in which they are declared/initialized.  
We can't access them outside the block.  

## 9.3 Shadowing

A variable shadows other variable of the same name which is defined in its parent scope.

Example  

```javascript
var c = 100;

function x() {
  var c = 30;

  console.log('var c', c);
  console.log('window.c', window.c);

  window.c = 200;
}

x();

console.log(c);
```

### Illegal Shadowing

Following works,  
We can shadow `let` variables with `const` variables and vice versa.  

```javascript
let a = 99;

{
    let a = 999;
}

console.log(a);

let b = 11;

{
    const b = 111;
}

console.log(b);
```

But following gives an error,  
`Uncaught SyntaxError: Identifier 'a' has already been declared`

```javascript
let a = 99;

{
    var a = 999;
}

console.log(a);
```

We can't shadow `let`/`const` variables with `var` variables.  

The reason is - variables declared with `var` keyword have global scope,  
because they are attached to Global object (`window`/`this`).  

So when a variable declared using `let`/`const` is re-declared using `var`,  
we get the error - `Uncaught SyntaxError: Identifier 'a' has already been declared`.  

Here the scope of a variable redeclared using `var` overlaps with the one declared using `let`/`const`.  
And that is why we get "SyntaxError".  

Check the Source tab in the browser console.  

Following works,  

```javascript
let a = 99;

function abc() {
    var a = 999;
}

console.log(a);
```

Because variable `a` declared inside the function `abc()` is allocated memory in the function's execution context.  
Its scope is limited to that function only.  
Whereas variable `a` declared with `let` is allocated memory in the different location.
So it works.  

But we can shadow `var` variables with `let`/`const` variables.  
So following works,  

```javascript
var a = 99;

{
    let a = 999;
}

console.log(a);

var b = 88;

{
    const b = 888;
}

console.log(b);
```

> Scope works the same in regular functions and arrow functions.  
> There is no difference.
