# #16 JS Engine EXPOSED 🔥 Google's V8 Architecture 🚀 | Namaste JavaScript Ep. 16

## #16.1 JavaScript Runtime Environment

JavaScript Runtime Environment is like a big container which has everything to run JavaScript.

JavaScript Runtime Environment has  

- JavaScript Engine
- Set of APIs to Connect to Outer Environment
- Event Loop
- Callback/Task Queue
- Micro-Task Queue

JavaScript Engine is the main thing/heart of the JavaScript Runtime Environment.

## #16.2 Browser and Node.js Runtime

Browser and Node.js has JavaScript Runtime Environment, that is why they are able to run JavaScript.

Because of JavaScript Runtime Environment, we can run JavaScript wherever we want.

JavaScript Runtime Environment has a set of APIs to connect to outer environment,  
it will change as per the platform where we run JavaScript.

Like Node.js will have a separate set of APIs then the Browser.

Browser is meant for client side applications so it will have a set of APIs  
accordingly in his JavaScript Runtime Environment.  

Node.js is meant for server side applications so it will have a set of APIs  
accordingly in his JavaScript Runtime Environment.

## #16.3 List of JavaScript Engines

All browsers have their own JavaScript Engines.

| Browser/Platform | JavaScript Engine |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| Microsoft Edge | Chakra |
| Mozilla Firefox | SpiderMonkey |
| Google Chrome | V8 |
| Node.js | V8 |
| Deno | V8 |
| Bun | V8 |

## #16.4 First JavaScript Engine

"SpiderMonkey" is the first JavaScript Engine created by the creator of JavaScript - Brendan Eich.

## #16.5 Myths About JavaScript Engine

JavaScript Engine is not a hardware, it is a software.  
It is written in some lower level language.

For example Google Chrome's JavaScript Engine V8 is written in C++.  

## #16.6 JavaScript Engine Architecture

JavaScript Code --> PARSING --> COMPILATION --> EXECUTION

## #16.7 Syntax Parsers & Abstract Syntax Tree

JavaScript Code is passed to PARSING phase as input.

**PARSING**  
During this phase, code is broken down into tokens.

**Syntax Parser**  
It takes code and converts it into AST(Abstract Syntax Tree).

Check with the help of the following tool:  
[AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net)

## #16.8 Compilation & Execution of JavaScript Code

**COMPILATION**  
Output of PARSING is then passed to COMPILATION phase.

COMPILATION & EXECUTION go hand in hand.

## #16.9 JIT (Just In Time) Compilation

JavaScript has JIT (Just In Time) Compilation.

Is JavaScript interpreted or compiled language?

**Interpreter**  
In interpreted languages the code is executed using an Interpreter.  
Interpreter executes code line by line from top to bottom.  
It doesn't know what can happen in the next line.

**Pros**  
Execution is fast, immediately starts execution since there is no compilation phase.

**Compiler**
In compiled languages the code is compiled first and then executed.

**Pros**
Program is executed efficiently.

## #16.10 Is JavaScript interpreted or compiled language?

Most of the modern JavaScript Engines uses an interpreter plus a compiler both together.  
So it depends on JavaScript Engine whether it uses purely an interpreter or JIT Compiler to run JavaScript.  

> JIT Compiler = Interpreter + Compiler

JIT Compiler uses both Interpreter & Compiler to execute JavaScript code.  
It compiles code at runtime that is why it is called JIT Compiler.

## #16.11 Garbage Collector - Mark & Sweep Algorithm

**Garbage Collector**  
It tries to free-up memory whenever possible.  
It uses "Mark & Sweep Algorithm" to do this.  

Read more about Mark & Sweep Algorithm.

Compiler does a lot of things behind the scenes to optimize the code  

- Inlining
- Copy Elision
- Inline Caching

## #16.12 Fastest JavaScript Engine

Google Chrome's V8 is the fastest JavaScript Engine.

V8 has an interpreter known as "Ignition", optimizing compiler known as "Turbo Fan" etc.

## #16.13 Google Chrome's V8 JavaScript Engine Architecture
