# #14 Callback Functions in JS ft. Event Listeners 🔥| Namaste JavaScript Ep. 14

Ref: [addEventListener](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener)

Ref: [removeEventListener](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/removeEventListener)

## 14.1 What is a callback function in JavaScript?

Functions are first class citizens in JavaScript.  
That means we can pass them as an argument into another function.  
These are called callbacks.  

[Callback Function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Callback_function)

Callbacks are used to write async operations.  

## 14.2 JavaScript is synchronous and single threaded language

## 14.3 Blocking the main thread

JavaScript has only one callstack, which is also called main thread.  
So if any operation/function blocks this callstack, that is known as blocking the main thread.

We can have a function in our script that may take longer to finish.  
Because JavaScript is synchronous and single threaded language  
such function will block the main thread.  

For examle,  
- calling an API (either 3rd party API or application API)
- IO operations like reading/writing from/to a file
- awaiting for user input, in case of user interaction
etc.

We should always use async operation for the things that takes time.  
That way we won't block the main thread.

> Never block the main thread :)

## 14.4 Power of callbacks

Callbacks allows us to write asynchronous code easily without blocking the main thread.  

## 14.5 Deep dive into Event Listeners

We can listen to different events of an HTML element and attach a listener to it.  
A listener is basically a callback function.  
So the callback listener function will be executed whenever an event occurs.  

## 14.6 Closures/Scope demo with Event Listeners

In the Chrome browser open Dev Tools.  
Inspect an HTML element and then click on "Event Listeners" tab  
to get a list of all the event listeners attached to this element.

## 14.7 Garbage collection and removeEventListeners

Why do we need to remove Event Listeners?  
In the large codebase a lot of people write code to remove Event Listeners.  

This is because -  
Event Listeners are heavy, takes a lot of memory space.  
Even if the Call Stack is empty, application has to keep all of the Event Listeners in memory.  
So if we are using a lot of Event Listeners on our page then we may run out of memory.  
That is why it is important to remove Event Listeners when they are not required.  
